helmcharts/zalf-nextcloud/README.md, before:

# Infos on helmchart `zalf-nextcloud` #

## Nextcloud backup and recovery ##

### On the backup process ###

The nextcloud backup relies on `velero` as main backup tool and on the `spilo` (aka Zalando PostgreSQL flavor)
integrated point-in-time backup.

`velero` will create backups of (nearly) all kubernetes objects that can be
found within the namespace `fairagro-nextcloud`. When it encounters a `PersistentVolume`, it will leverages
its `kopia` plugin to also backup the volume content. It is configured to skip `PersistentVolume`s that belong
to PostgreSQL databases, though. This is because `spilo` features its own backup procedure that cannot easily
be integrated with `velero`. The `spilo` backup procedure relies on PostgreSQL
base backups and additional WAL file backups (performed by the integrated tool `walg`) that enable
point-in-time-recovery.

All this is tied together with the `nextcloud-backup` script that is part of this repository. It is wriiten in
python and consumes the kuberentes API. It is distributed as docker image that gets deployed as kubernetes
`CronJob` that in turn will run once per night. It performs the following steps:

1. Enter nextcloud maintenace mode, so there are no database modifications during backup
2. Patch the kubernetes `postgresql` object of the nextcloud database to set the restore timestamp to the current
   backup time. During recovery this will tell `spilo` to create a point-in-time database recovery with the
   correct time.
3. Perform `velero` backup. This will backup all files stored within nextcloud.
4. Leave nextcloud maintenace mode.

### On the recovery process ###

Recovery will never replace existing kubernetes objects. So before recovery, the whole namespace
`fairagro-nextcloud` need to be deleted, if it already exists.

Disregard `argocd` completely during recovery process, it can be synced after everything is in place again. Please
be aware that in the current state of this project it is dangerous to have `argocd` auto-sync enabled for the
nextcloud app. This is because an unintentional restore triggered by `argocd` might render the backup unusable.

To trigger the restore there will be the `restore.py` script within in `nextcloud-backup` container. But for now
this script does still not exist, so we describe a manual restore here:

1. find the most recent `velero` backup:

   ```bash
   velero get backup
   ```

2. restore that backup:

   ```bash
   velero create restore restore-01 --from-backup=<backup name>
   ```

3. observe the restore process:

   ```bash
   velero describe restore restore-01
   velero logs restore restore-01
   ```

This will cause `velero` to restore all kubernetes objects from the backup, including the `PersistentVolume`
content of non-PostgreSQL volumes (i.e. all files hosted inside nextcloud). It will skip all PostgreSQL `Pods`
and `PersistentVolumes` but only restore the `PostgreSQL` object itself. This will then recreate all needed
resources and automatically recover the database content. The recovery timestamp is already included
in the `PostgreSQL` object (refer to bullet point 2 in the backup section).

### Backup/Recovery caveats ###

#### Start a new nextcloud instance from scratch ####

That means, you do not recover an existing backup, but do a fresh new nextcloud setup. In this case there is
no recovery timestamp included in the `PostgreSQL` object, so recovery in fact should be disabled. But `spilo`
will fail to initialize the database if it finds an existing backup in the backup storage. So you have to
delete it first.

#### Never recover a backup more than once ####

A PostgreSQL database backup consists of two parts: the base backup and the WAL files. There can be several
backup timelines in parallel -- i.e. several base backups with their corresponding WAL files. When spilo
performs the database recovery, it will always choose the newest base backup. When recovery is finished, it
will automatically create a new base backup. So a second recovery attempt will fail, because the desired
timestamp is not reachable from the newest base backup (point-in-time recovery can only go forward in time
from the chosen base backup).

There should be a solution for this: it is possible to set the backup timeline for restore by specifying the
environment variable `CLONE_TARGET_TIMELINE`. The timeline to choose can be queried by calling `wal-g` within
the database container:

```bash
su - postgres
envdir "/run/etc/wal-e.d/env" wal-g wal-show --detailed-json | jq '. | max_by(.id) | .id'
```

This needs to be done within the `PostgreSQL` object when also setting the recovery time.

#### Failing database and creation of new timeline during backup ####

This is just an information to prevent from confusion.

During backup you can observe that both database instances will terminate and restart. The reason for this is
unknown. Restart of the primary database instance will trigger a failover. This will implicitely create a new
PostgreSQL timeline. So a database backup will also create a new timelime. During restore the original timeline
will be restored.

## Some useful shell commands ##

### To trigger the nextcloud backup CronJob ###

e.g. for testing puposes:

```bash
kubectl create job backup-test -n fairagro-nextcloud --from=cronjob/nextcloud-backup-cronjob
```

### To create a test backup container and execute a shell within ###

This pod will run for 10 minutes, then it will change to state 'completed' and needs to be deleted:

```bash
kubectl apply -n fairagro-nextcloud -f helmcharts/zalf-nextcloud/tests/backup-pod-with-shell.yaml
kubectl exec -it -n fairagro-nextcloud temporary-nextcloud-backup-pod -- sh
```

To debug the service account token (should be `nextcloud-backup-account`):

```bash
kubectl exec -it -n fairagro-nextcloud temporary-nextcloud-backup-pod \
    -- cat /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/token \
    | jq -R '.' \
    | jq 'split(".")|{header: .[0]|@base64d|fromjson, payload: .[1]|@base64d|fromjson}'
```

Note that `jq` is executed inside the pod. If it's not installed, consider using a local `jq` installation.

### To debug a failed backup ###

#### Check the cronjob pod logs ####

```bash
kubectl logs -n fairagro-nextcloud -l batch.kubernetes.io/job-name=backup-test
```

#### Check the backup state ####

First find your new backup:

```bash
velero backup get
```

Now investigate it:

```bash
velero backup describe <backup-name>
kubectl describe backups.velero.io -n fairagro-nextcloud <backup-name>
```

#### Investigate the backup logs ####

```bash
velero backup logs <backup-name>
```

Commit message:

removed CLONE_TARGET_TIMELINE again, as it does only influence WAL restore, not the basebackup.

helmcharts/zalf-nextcloud/README.md, after:

# Infos on helmchart `zalf-nextcloud` #

## Nextcloud backup and recovery ##

### On the backup process ###

The nextcloud backup relies on `velero` as main backup tool and on the `spilo` (aka Zalando PostgreSQL flavor)
integrated point-in-time backup.

`velero` will create backups of (nearly) all kubernetes objects that can be
found within the namespace `fairagro-nextcloud`. When it encounters a `PersistentVolume`, it will leverages
its `kopia` plugin to also backup the volume content. It is configured to skip `PersistentVolume`s that belong
to PostgreSQL databases, though. This is because `spilo` features its own backup procedure that cannot easily
be integrated with `velero`. The `spilo` backup procedure relies on PostgreSQL
base backups and additional WAL file backups (performed by the integrated tool `walg`) that enable
point-in-time-recovery.

All this is tied together with the `nextcloud-backup` script that is part of this repository. It is wriiten in
python and consumes the kuberentes API. It is distributed as docker image that gets deployed as kubernetes
`CronJob` that in turn will run once per night. It performs the following steps:

1. Enter nextcloud maintenace mode, so there are no database modifications during backup
2. Patch the kubernetes `postgresql` object of the nextcloud database to set the restore timestamp to the current
   backup time. During recovery this will tell `spilo` to create a point-in-time database recovery with the
   correct time.
3. Perform `velero` backup. This will backup all files stored within nextcloud.
4. Leave nextcloud maintenace mode.

### On the recovery process ###

Recovery will never replace existing kubernetes objects. So before recovery, the whole namespace
`fairagro-nextcloud` need to be deleted, if it already exists.

Disregard `argocd` completely during recovery process, it can be synced after everything is in place again. Please
be aware that in the current state of this project it is dangerous to have `argocd` auto-sync enabled for the
nextcloud app. This is because an unintentional restore triggered by `argocd` might render the backup unusable.

To trigger the restore there will be the `restore.py` script within in `nextcloud-backup` container. But for now
this script does still not exist, so we describe a manual restore here:

1. find the most recent `velero` backup:

   ```bash
   velero get backup
   ```

2. restore that backup:

   ```bash
   velero create restore restore-01 --from-backup=<backup name>
   ```

3. observe the restore process:

   ```bash
   velero describe restore restore-01
   velero logs restore restore-01
   ```

This will cause `velero` to restore all kubernetes objects from the backup, including the `PersistentVolume`
content of non-PostgreSQL volumes (i.e. all files hosted inside nextcloud). It will skip all PostgreSQL `Pods`
and `PersistentVolumes` but only restore the `PostgreSQL` object itself. This will then recreate all needed
resources and automatically recover the database content. The recovery timestamp is already included
in the `PostgreSQL` object (refer to bullet point 2 in the backup section).

### Backup/Recovery caveats ###

#### Start a new nextcloud instance from scratch ####

That means, you do not recover an existing backup, but do a fresh new nextcloud setup. In this case there is
no recovery timestamp included in the `PostgreSQL` object, so recovery in fact should be disabled. But `spilo`
will fail to initialize the database if it finds an existing backup in the backup storage. So you have to
delete it first.

#### Never recover a backup more than once ####

A PostgreSQL database backup consists of two parts: the base backup and the WAL files. There can be several
backup timelines in parallel -- i.e. several base backups with their corresponding WAL files. When spilo
performs the database recovery, it will always choose the newest base backup. When recovery is finished, it
will automatically create a new base backup. So a second recovery attempt will fail, because the desired
timestamp is not reachable from the newest base backup (point-in-time recovery can only go forward in time
from the chosen base backup).

There should be a solution for this: it is possible to set the backup timeline for restore by specifying the
environment variable `CLONE_TARGET_TIMELINE`. The timeline to choose can be queried by calling `wal-g` within
the database container:

```bash
su - postgres
envdir "/run/etc/wal-e.d/env" wal-g wal-show --detailed-json | jq '. | max_by(.id) | .id'
```

This needs to be done within the `PostgreSQL` object when also setting the recovery time.

#### Failing database and creation of new timeline during backup ####

This is just an information to prevent from confusion.

During backup you can observe that both database instances will terminate and restart. This is triggered by a
patch of the kubernetes PostgreSQL object. Restart of the primary database instance will trigger a failover.
This will implicitely create a new PostgreSQL timeline and cause a new basebackup of the new timetime once the
PostgreSQL cluster is restarted. It is yet unclear if this has any implications (except a waste of storage, CPU
and network resources because of the additional backup). During restore the original timelinewill be restored.

## Some useful shell commands ##

### To trigger the nextcloud backup CronJob ###

e.g. for testing puposes:

```bash
kubectl create job backup-test -n fairagro-nextcloud --from=cronjob/nextcloud-backup-cronjob
```

### To create a test backup container and execute a shell within ###

This pod will run for 10 minutes, then it will change to state 'completed' and needs to be deleted:

```bash
kubectl apply -n fairagro-nextcloud -f helmcharts/zalf-nextcloud/tests/backup-pod-with-shell.yaml
kubectl exec -it -n fairagro-nextcloud temporary-nextcloud-backup-pod -- sh
```

To debug the service account token (should be `nextcloud-backup-account`):

```bash
kubectl exec -it -n fairagro-nextcloud temporary-nextcloud-backup-pod \
    -- cat /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/token \
    | jq -R '.' \
    | jq 'split(".")|{header: .[0]|@base64d|fromjson, payload: .[1]|@base64d|fromjson}'
```

Note that `jq` is executed inside the pod. If it's not installed, consider using a local `jq` installation.

### To debug a failed backup ###

#### Check the cronjob pod logs ####

```bash
kubectl logs -n fairagro-nextcloud -l batch.kubernetes.io/job-name=backup-test
```

#### Check the backup state ####

First find your new backup:

```bash
velero backup get
```

Now investigate it:

```bash
velero backup describe <backup-name>
kubectl describe backups.velero.io -n fairagro-nextcloud <backup-name>
```

#### Investigate the backup logs ####

```bash
velero backup logs <backup-name>
```
